monte-carlo-metadynamics-cpu
============================

This solver extends :doc:`monte-carlo-metropolis-cpu` with a history-dependent
metadynamics bias potential defined in one or two collective variables.

The underlying Monte Carlo step, trial moves and acceptance rule are inherited
from the Metropolis solver. The metadynamics-specific settings control how
Gaussians are deposited into the collective-variable potential landscape.

Required settings
-----------------

All required settings from :doc:`monte-carlo-metropolis-cpu` still apply.
In addition, the metadynamics solver requires:

``gaussian_deposition_stride``
  Number of solver iterations between Gaussian depositions.

``gaussian_amplitude``
  Base Gaussian amplitude in meV.

``collective_variables``
  A list of one or two collective-variable blocks.

Collective variable settings
---------------------------

Each entry in ``collective_variables`` must define:

``name``
  Name of the collective variable module.

``gaussian_width``
  Width of the deposited Gaussian along this coordinate.

``range_min``
  Minimum sampled coordinate.

``range_max``
  Maximum sampled coordinate.

``range_step``
  Discretisation step for the potential grid.

Optional solver settings
------------------------

``gaussian_deposition_delay``
  Number of steps to wait before starting Gaussian depositions.
  Default: ``0``.

``output_steps``
  Number of steps between potential output operations.
  Default: ``gaussian_deposition_stride``.

``cvars_output_steps``
  Number of steps between writing the collective-variable trajectory.
  Default: ``10``.

``tempering``
  Enable tempered metadynamics. Default: ``false``.

``tempering_bias_temperature``
  Bias temperature used when ``tempering = true``.

``potential_file``
  Import an existing potential landscape from file before sampling starts.

``parallel_shared_potential_file``
  Shared HDF5 potential file for parallel metadynamics workflows.

``parallel_shared_potential_sync_steps``
  Number of steps between synchronising with the shared potential file.
  Default: ``1000``.

Boundary conditions
-------------------

Each collective-variable block can optionally specify:

``upper_bc`` / ``lower_bc``
  Boundary condition type. Supported values are ``hard``, ``mirror`` and
  ``restoring``.

``upper_restoring_bc_threshold`` / ``lower_restoring_bc_threshold``
  Threshold coordinate for restoring boundary conditions.

``restoring_bc_spring_constant``
  Spring constant used by restoring boundary conditions.

Example
-------

.. code-block:: cfg

   solver = {
     module = "monte-carlo-metadynamics-cpu";
     max_steps = 100000;
     gaussian_amplitude = 10.0;
     gaussian_deposition_stride = 100;
     output_steps = 100;

     collective_variables = (
       {
         name = "topological_charge";
         gaussian_width = 0.1;
         range_min = -1.05;
         range_max = 0.05;
         range_step = 0.01;
       },
       {
         name = "magnetisation";
         component = "z";
         gaussian_width = 0.01;
         range_min = 0.0;
         range_max = 1.0;
         range_step = 0.001;
       }
     );
   };

Output
------

The solver writes:

- the usual Monte Carlo move statistics,
- the collective-variable trajectory in ``metad_cvars.tsv``,
- metadynamics statistics in ``metad_stats.tsv`` when tempering is enabled,
- the bias potential output generated by the metadynamics potential object.
